---
layout: blog
title: 'My Bizarre Adventure in RL: PPO'
date: 2026-06-28
permalink: /posts/2026/6/PPO/
image_path: /blog-assets/2026-06-28-PPO/img/
tags:
  - Reinforcement Learning
---

## Preliminaries

### Policy Gradient Methods

Policy gradient methods work by computing an estimator of the policy gradient 
$$
\begin{equation}
\hat{g}=\hat{\mathbb{E}}_t\left[\nabla_\theta\log\pi_\theta(a_t\vert s_t)\hat{A}_t\right]
\tag{1}
\end{equation}
$$
and plugging it into a stochastic gradient ascent algorithm.

- Policy $\pi_\theta(a_t\vert s_t)$: given the current state $s_t$, the policy assigns a probability to action $a_t$.
- Estimated advantage $\hat{A}_t$ of the action at time $t$: whether the action being better or worse than expected.

So the learning objective we use in automatic differentiation would be
$$
\mathcal{L}^{PG}(\theta)=\hat{\mathbb{E}}_t\left[\log\pi_\theta(a_t\vert s_t)\hat{A}_t\right]
\tag{2}
$$
whose gradient is exactly the policy gradient estimator.

### Trust Region Policy Optimization Methods

Policy gradient updates can be unstable if the new policy moves too far away from the old policy using theme sampled data.

Trust Region Policy Optimization (TRPO) maximizes an objective function subject to a constraint on the size of the policy update
$$
\begin{equation}
\max_\theta\hat{\mathbb{E}}_t\left[\frac{\pi_\theta(a_t\vert s_t)}{\pi_{\theta_{\text{old}}}(a_t\vert s_t)}\hat{A}_t\right]
\quad\text{subject to}\quad
\hat{\mathbb{E}}_t\left[\mathrm{KL}\left[\pi_{\theta_{\text{old}}}(\cdot\vert s_t),\pi_\theta(\cdot\vert s_t)\right]\right]\leq\delta
\tag{3}
\end{equation}
$$
where $\theta_{\text{old}}$ is the vector of policy parameters before the update.

This constrained optimization problem can be simplified into an unconstrained version
$$
\max_\theta\hat{\mathbb{E}}_t
\left[
\frac{\pi_\theta(a_t\vert s_t)}{\pi_{\theta_{\text{old}}}(a_t\vert s_t)}\hat{A}_t -
\beta\,\mathrm{KL}\left[\pi_{\theta_{\text{old}}}(\cdot\vert s_t),\pi_\theta(\cdot\vert s_t)\right]
\right]
\tag{4}
$$
where $\beta$ is some coefficient. However it's hard to choose a single value $\beta$ that performs well across different problems.

## Proximal Policy Optimization

Let $r_t(\theta)$ denote the probability ratio in Eq. (4) $r_t(\theta)=\frac{\pi_\theta(a_t\vert s_t)}{\pi_{\theta_{\text{old}}}(a_t\vert s_t)}$, $r_t(\theta_{\text{old}})=1$ especially. Thus the objective TRPO maximizes is formed as
$$
\mathcal{L}^{CPI}(\theta)=\hat{\mathbb{E}}_t\left[r_t(\theta)\hat{A}_t\right]
\tag{5}
$$
where "CPI" is short for conservative policy iteration. Similar to Policy Gradient, maximization of $\mathcal{L}^{CPI}$ would lead to an excessively large policy update.

To penalize changes to the policy, a clipped surrogate objective is proposed:
$$
\mathcal{L}^{CLIP}(\theta) = \hat{\mathbb{E}}_t\left[\min(
\underbrace{r_t(\theta)\hat{A}_t}_{CPI},
\underbrace{\mathrm{clip}(r_t(\theta), 1-\epsilon, 1+\epsilon)\hat{A}_t}_{\text{clipped }CPI}
)\right]
\tag{6}
$$
where $\epsilon$ is a hyperparameter.

PPO proposes the following objective
$$
\mathcal{L}_t^{CLIP+VF+S}(\theta)=\hat{\mathbb{E}}_t\left[\mathcal{L}_t^{CLIP}(\theta)-c_1\mathcal{L}_t^{VF}(\theta)+c_2\mathcal{H}[\pi_\theta](s_t)\right],
\tag{7}
$$
where $c_1,c_2$ are coefficients, $\mathcal{L}_t^{VF}$ is a squared-error loss $(V_\theta(s_t)-V_t^{\text{target}})^2$, and $S$ denotes an entropy bonus.

The value function $V(s)$ estimates the expected future reward starting from state $s$, which powers the advantage estimation as
$$
\hat{A}_t=\delta_t+(\gamma\lambda)\delta_{t+1}+\dots+(\gamma\lambda)^{T-t+1}\delta_{T-1}
\quad\text{where}\quad 
\delta_t=r_t+\gamma V(s_{t+1})-V(s_t)
\tag{8}
$$
where $t$ specifies the time index in $[0,T]$, within a given length-$T$ trajectory segment.
